For all their disagreements, the left and the right tend to agree on one thing: there is a trade-off between unfettered markets and centralized regulation. They just disagree on which direction on the axis we should move: conservatives see failures of the government and regulation and advocate for a return to less-regulated markets. And liberals see a cornucopia of market failures and advocate for more government regulation. Most people on either side will concede that their end of the axis is imperfect, but that given the absurdities of what we have now, we have no choice but to move in their chosen direction.

I am here to say that everybody is wrong. I agree with David Friedman, the anarcho-capitalist, when he says that while we might imagine a set of regulations that do exactly what we want them to, we have to take the fact that the government has *failed* to produce such regulations as admissible evidence that perhaps centralized authority isn’t the way to get what we want. And I agree with David Graeber, the anarcho-communist, when he says that unfettered capitalism is just as tyrannical as authoritarian communism. And that is exactly the problem: both the centralized state and the unfettered market represent their own tyranny; the left has chosen to advocate for one, the right, for the other[^axis]. 

But what if we took the opposite approach: reducing *both* the tyranny of the state *and* the tyranny of the market. This is possible: simply reduce government regulations *while also* dramatically reducing inequality. In this essay I will go part of the way towards make the case for this approach. That is, I’d like to argue that markets are fundamentally democratic — and therefore good[^unique] — economic institutions that are distorted into engines of evil by inequality.

### I. Markets are democratic\*
I need to defend a claim I made in the last sentence, that democratic economic institutions are good. To do that let me start with what I take to be the principle of democracy: *people should have a say in the decisions that affect them*. This is not necessarily the definition of democracy that most people have in their heads, but it should be. Democracy is just “rule by the people”. But rule over what? Everything? No: just over the things that affect you. 
%% there seem to be two competing phrasings “people should have a say in decisions that affect them” and “the market should produce what people want”. I treat them as basically the same principle, but perhaps the link isn’t so obvious %% 

The interpersonal corollary to this principle is the following: if a decision affects you more than another person, if you *care more* about the outcome of a decision than that person, you should have more of a say. A question that many people ask is, well who is to say how much I care about something?

Markets have an answer. How much you care about something is how much you are willing to pay for it. In effect, markets force you to put your money where your mouth is. And the result is quite miraculous: if someone wants something enough to pay 10 dollars for it, someone else will produce it if, and only if, they can produce it for less than 10 dollars[^exceptions]. The market will always have a tendency to produce things whose benefit outweighs the cost. 

As a mechanism of decentralized computation, the system is ingenious. Instead of having to centrally plan and produce what people want, you let entrepreneurs go out and find what people are willing to pay for. The ones that are good at doing that will good rewarded. 

But the decentralization point is purely instrumental, towards the end of *democracy*. When you ask someone what a good market produces, they’ll probably say something like, “the things people want”. By allowing people to allocate their “votes” (money) towards the the things they care about, markets let people exercise democratic power over what the market produces. 

So the intuition of a separate “public sphere” and the “private sphere”, where democracy is confined to the public sphere, is misguided[^expand_democracy]. It may be true if we accept “majority rule” as our definition of democracy, but this is an impoverished one indeed. Markets have the potential to work much better than majority rule, because they give people more of a say in the decisions that affect them. This is how we want our democracies to work. Imagine there were people in Texas voting on how roads should be built in a New York town. We wouldn’t stand for it!

### II. \*But only when they are equal
But there is one massive, glaring, whopper of an asterisk on all of this. his only works if ten dollars is a common unit of caring: that if both you and I were willing to spend ten dollars on a shirt, it should signify that we both value that shirt approximately equally. Unless we believe that billionaires have a million times more fucks to give than everyone else, it is quite clear that our current system falls short of this ideal (to put it mildly).

What goes wrong when ten dollars for me doesn’t signal the same underlying value as ten dollars for you? The next few sections will outline some prototypes of things that go wrong.
#### A. Bidding competition
Let’s say that that someone with a net worth of ten dollars is starving and wants to eat. She will pay a corn farmer her whole net worth just to have something to eat for her and her family. But then suppose there is a billionaire who can and will pay multiples of that to have the same corn turned into ethanol for his private jet. Who will the farmer sell to?

This is perhaps a trick question. If the farmer only cares about money, he will sell to the billionaire. But if he cares about doing the thing that is better for the world, he will sell to the woman. This divergence in what is good for the world and what the market will reward has a simple root: the willingness to pay is an abysmally poor measure of value in an unequal world. It doesn’t take a genius to see that a billionaire’s willingness to pay a thousand dollars demonstrates a lot less value than my or your willingness to pay that much.

Thus, when one person wants something more than another person, they can still lose in a bidding competition if the other person has a lot more money. This is non-democracy, because the person who cares less has more of a say.
#### B. Bargaining
Suppose a fast food chain hires a dishwasher at minimum wage. He works long hours, in an uncomfortable, poorly ventilated basement, and he can’t eat three full meals if he wants his paycheck to last a whole month. The market logic goes: well, the benefit to the fast food chain (how much they were willing to pay the worker) exceeded the cost to the worker (how much he was willing to work for), so nothing to see here! It’s a moment of value creation just like any other voluntary transaction!

But there is something not quite right about a massive multinational tossing ten-dollar bill to a worker to endure hellish conditions, and to shrug their shoulders and say, “well, he agreed to it!” There are many ways of putting the issue, but they all come down to *undemocracy* that results from inequality. Here are two:
1. Why does the worker agree to it? It’s because his other options (possibly unemployment, eviction, hunger, etc.) are worse. And make no mistake: not being able to afford food, housing, healthcare, etc. is a failure of *democracy* in the market. It means that you don’t have enough of a say, enough power, to get society to produce (and provide to you) the things you need.
2. The other way to look at it is that the ten dollars is worth much more to the worker than it means to the multinational. On the buy side, this results in a scenario like the one I described above, where if two people are willing to pay the same amount for something, the poorer person likely values it more. On the sell side, you get situations like this, where a poor person will endure a lot more suffering for a lot less money[^alt_ineq_expl]. 
However you look at it, the worker has limited leverage in a bargaining situation to improve his lot because of his minuscule economic power in the market.

#### C. Value capture
The examples of bidding competition and bargaining are still examples of value creation, because they involve two parties voluntarily entering into an agreement that makes both better off (however unfairly that benefit is distributed between the parties). But sometimes inequality leads to genuine value destruction. This happens when people start getting paid not to *create* value, but to *capture* value. 

In a market economy, you can  generate wealth either by value creation, by making things other people value (and will pay for), or by value capturing, figuring out how to capture a higher percentage of the value created in the economy. These are separate because in practice, no one can fully capture the value that they put into the world: scientists make discoveries that enrich pharma companies, innovative companies help to line the pockets of their copycats, and landscaping companies benefit admiring passerby who are not themselves paying customers. So there are two wars to be fought: one for value creation, and one for value capture.

In practice, many value capture strategies are things that only very wealthy people or corporations can do. For instance, companies may hire investment bankers to advise on a merger or an acquisition not because it creates an overall benefit to the economy, but it means they can charge higher prices as a result of their resulting increased market power. Or companies may hire lobbyists to push for government policy that makes it harder for competitors to emerge. Or they may hire lawyers to litigate against smaller competitors, driving them out of business. Or they may higher advertisers in an effort to capture a larger share of the market, without actually making their products better or growing the market. These tactics create very little value for the overall economy. But the industries that enable such tactics —  investment banking, lobbying, corporate law, marketing — are some of the most lucrative you can think of. 

Why? Because their relatively small customer base has deep pockets, and they have “voted” in the hyper-skewed democracy of the market for the provision of these services. In a world where wealth were more equal, the market for this nonsense would be much smaller.
#### D. Why we don’t have nice things
Let me do a quick rapid fire of a bunch of other failings of markets that can be attributed to inequality. Here are some things we *don’t* have:
- Good mass transit systems in the US: who is riding on mass transit systems? Mostly not millionaires and billionaires. The purchasing power of the entire ridership of a small city’s public transit system might be less than a billionaire’s. So what’s going to get built, the billionaire’s private jet that benefits a few people, or a functioning bus system that benefits tens of thousands?
- Labor-saving technologies that could, say, shorten the workday: because workers are poorer, they value every dollar more. The wealthy can thereby get away with paying them very little. This diminishes the incentive to invest in the development and purchase of labor-saving technologies, which could be transformative for people’s lived experiences, by, for instance, halving the work day[^automation]. A similar argument works for technologies that make work safer or more enjoyable — why do it when you can pay workers a pittance to endure mind numbing and unsafe working conditions instead?
- A functioning sharing economy: Remember in the 2010s, when the “sharing economy” was touted as the next big thing that would be enabled by social media and the peer-to-peer networks they created? The promise was that people could coordinate to save money and time by, say, carpooling, couch-surfing, or alternating on meal prep. But this vision just devolved into the likes of Uber, Airbnb, and Doordash, basically digital (and only slightly cheaper) versions of taxis, hotels, and takeout. What happened? It turns out that real peer-to-peer stuff, like carpooling, while cheaper, is less convenient, and involves more coordination. Wealthier people are willing to pay for this convenience: scheduling a car to your door, booking a room with a click of a button. The poor and working class people who would benefit most from the cost savings of a real, peer-to-peer sharing economy don’t have the collective purchasing power for companies to make money making it happen — so it doesn’t happen[^value_capture].
The list goes on. Why are there food deserts in rural America? Why do we have whole-floor penthouses going up on the 101st floor of billionaire’s row in New York, but no affordable housing? Why aren’t there quality private schools in poor communities? The answer is the non-democracy of an unequal market: all of these are things would benefit populations with low purchasing power — and the market doesn’t care about them.

### III. The second logic of the market
I may have been a little quick to extoll democracy as the *only* virtue of the market. There is a second, competing logic to the logic of democracy, that *people should have a say in the decisions that affect them*. The other logic is the logic of reciprocity: *society should reward people who have contributed*. If you prioritize the logic of reciprocity, you may still think that millionaires and billionaires *should* have more of a say in what the market produces. 
 %%is reciprocity the right word? I’m basically talking about reward, compensation, etc. maybe I should unpack this logic elsewhere. It’s also another logic in there, is that you allocate capital to people who are “good” at allocating it. %%.

Now, some people might think that the second logic, the logic of reciprocity, is *for the sake* of the democracy: that is, we reward people for producing the things that people want *because* we want a market that produces what people want. If our rewarding scheme leads to the creation of billionaires that make the market undemocratic, it would be like getting yourself addicted to cigarettes in order to reduce stress, only to suffer increased stress from perpetual nicotine withdrawal.
%% Is there a better phrase that means pursuing proximate goals that at the end of the day undermines the pursuit of the ultimate end %%

But some people don’t treat the logic of reciprocity as a means to the end of democracy. They think that people who have contributed more *should* have more of a say, because they deserve it. They have worked for it and they have earned it, and they should be rewarded. Under that logic, a billionaire, as someone who produced things that people value, *should* have an outsized say in what society produces. To that argument I have a few responses:
1. *Wealth doesn’t correspond to contribution.* The difference in wealth between an average person and a billionaire is not just because the billionaire was that much better at figuring out what people want and making those things. There are a few other factors at play.
	a. *Simply having wealth lets you passively build more of it.* Once you have some wealth, you can expect to get a return on it, because other people will pay you to have access to it (e.g., people will pay you interest if you make them a loan). So while it may be that your wealth comes from giving people what they want, a large part of that is *the wealth itself*. I think many would agree that, say, selling a million dollars worth of toys counts as a contribution, and you should be rewarded by being permitted to by a million dollars worth of something else. But does getting interest on that money count as a contribution deserving of a *further* increase in your ability to influence what the market produces, a further skewing of the former democracy of the market in your favor?
	%% shloka response: by lending money, you are providing a service. just like you would be with time, effort, resources, etc. so why shouldn’t you get paid? also an economy in which you don’t get compensated for lending money would suck. are the actions of an individual lender immoral? %%
	b. *Even if it isn’t passive, building wealth is easier once you have it.* Imagine Eric Schmidt, the former CEO of Google and a billionaire, has an idea for a great new AI system. And imagine that a college student has the same idea for a great new AI system. Who would you bet on to be able to make it a reality? Well, the Eric Schmidt has the capital he needs to hire all the engineers, the data centers, etc., to make it a reality. The student needs to get a venture capitalist to speak to her, to then convince him to give her his money, probably not get the full amount necessary to build the thing at full scale, convince talented people to work for her, etc. By this time Eric Schmidt has already released the beta version. Even if the student manages to beat him to it, she’s already at a handicap because she’s already given the venture capitalist the rights to 50% of her profits. All this is to say, creating wealth starting from wealth is easier. If we are interested in giving people more say in the market for making contributions, should that not be weighted by how easy it was to make those contributions?
	c. *Profits $\neq$ Societal contributions.* So far in this piece, I have been talking about an ideal-world market in which you get paid ten dollars if you produce something that people value at ten dollars. You can thereby generate a profit if you can produce the thing for less than ten dollars. But going back to the idea of value capture, it is well accepted that it is much more difficult to capture the value of certain contributions than others. This is what “positive externalities” or “public goods” refer to. Things like public parks, an educated citizenry, scientific knowledge, a great piece of art: the municipal government, our teachers, our scientists, and our artists are not getting paid even a fraction of the benefit they produce to society, because most of what they produce is positive externality. Our system is comically off-kilter when it comes to the calibration of compensation with contribution.
2. *Why this particular mode of compensation?* There are many ways that people could be compensated for producing things people want. What a pure market does: essentially rewarding people with the *full* surplus of what they generate, in perpetuity, with interest, in addition to any sort of prestige, fame, or influence they might accrue as a result of their contribution, is a highly particular way of rewarding people. There are systems in which people are simply rewarded with prestige and influence in the community. This is how academia works, essentially. Or, people could be rewarded with only a share of the surplus that they generated. When a scientist makes a discovery that enables highly profitable technologies to be sold to the public, no one thinks the scientist is entitled to all the surplus that her discovery generates, in perpetuity. In fact, such a scientist would likely get little more than prestige. Or, the compensation could be time-limited. Patents expire, because we feel that certain kinds of property (here, intellectual property) should not last forever. And if your high school friend calls you after twenty five years to call in a 50-dollar loan he made to you in high school, with interest, you would tell him to get lost. All this is to say that there are many ways that we can and do reward contributions, and there is no a priori reason to think that the market’s highly particular system is the best way.
3. *What are you rewarding people for?* The logic of reciprocity says that you reward people who have contributed. But what does it mean for them to have contributed? It means that they got someone to pay them for something. And who can pay them most? People who have the most money. And those are the people who have created desirable things in the past. So even at its best, the market gets corrupted away from rewarding the creators of desirable things. Instead, it rewards the creators of desirable things for the creators of desirable things[^meta]. I’ll increase my own power more by making something for a billionaire than something for a teacher, because the billionaire can pay me a lot more for it. %% but there are a lot more teachers! %% Is this the behavior we *want* to reward? %% explore the link to pagerank %%

But even after saying all of this, the foundational point of reciprocity is well-taken: markets operate by rewarding people who can produce the things people want. How do they do that? They pay you more if you produce the things that other people want, and less if you don’t. So the whole incentive system operates by creating inequality. 

This seems like a hopeless bind. Markets produce the things people value by creating inequality. But as soon as there is inequality, markets are no longer effective at producing what people, on the whole, value. This is a real puzzle, and tackling its solution is a task for another day.
### IV. Conclusion

I’ve argued a few things here:
1. Democracy is best defined as having a say in the decisions that affect you.
2. When thought of this way, markets are remarkably effective democratic institutions, 
3. But only when inequality is low.
4. There is another justification for markets, to reward people that make contributions.
5. But because of the way our current system 

But let's go back to where I started. I said that we *don't have to choose* between concentrating power with the capitalist class or concentrating power in the centralized state. While I couldn't go into all of the reasons for this, I addressed one: markets are undemocratic when there is inequality, and they would be much fairer if inequality were reduced. The nice part of the inequality problem is that it does not require centralization of state power to resolve — it only requires changes to the ground rules of the market.
%% my article has the opposite conditional structure: if there is inequality, markets don't function well. I don't know if I convincingly argue the converse. Of course, I don't fully believe the converse. But I should at least say that markets should function better without inequality. I mean, I think that comes out of the article. I do think it is a biconditional. But I need to police my language to make that clear throughout %%

Any system has ground rules. Even unfettered capitalism has ground rules: in particular, the rules of *property ownership*. Property ownership is a highly particular system of rules that could easily be different. Changes to these ground rules could reduce inequality, for instance, [[making property ownership temporary|making property ownership temporary]]. Changing the ground rules of property ownership is no more a centralization of state power than keeping the current rules of property ownership. Contrast a change of this sort to the creation of complex government programs or regulations that conservatives (often rightly) rail against. The government programs *centralize* power, the setting of ground rules sets a sound basis for a *decentralized* system to then operate unhindered.

Of course, even without inequality, problems remain. There are the classic problems of markets, like their failure to provision public goods, and their tendency to create negative externalities. There are also realms in which markets are simply not the right solution, because it is impossible to maintain a competitive marketplace (schools and healthcare might be examples of this). 

Still, reducing inequality will make a huge difference. And it is reassuring to know that this can be done without creating another kind of inequality, the inequality of political power, that accompanies the centralization of state authority.

*Contributors: Victor Odouard*

[^axis]:Would be nice to do a piece on this, the axis of tyranny and why it might exist. Is it just two different ways of maintaining power?
[^unique]:This is not to say that markets are the *only* good means of collectively organizing
[^exceptions]:Granted, there are many exceptions to this. As an example: just because someone is willing to pay ten dollars for something doesn’t mean that an entrepreneur will correctly ascertain that fact. There are many failures of the market like this one, which I go into in [[why capitalism doesn't give us what we want]]
[^expand_democracy]:Should do a piece on [[markets as democracy]]. People like to separate the world into two spheres, the private sector and the public sector, where the public sector is subject to democracy and the will of the people while the private sector is supposed to be undemocratic, governed by property rights
[^alt_ineq_expl]:Could this alone be used to explain inequality?
[^value_capture]:The other thing at play here is the matter of value capture. It is difficult for the “middleman corporation” to capture the value from true peer-to-peer interactions, because once people know each other, the trust they build allows them to easily cut out the middleman. To combat this, middleman corporations like Uber, Airbnb, etc., push customers towards things that look like more traditional consumer-producer relationships, which are less affordable.
[^meta]:This can actually build to an arbitrarily large regress. If we imagine a simple economy in which everyone goes to a market every week with their wares, and everyone starts with the same amount of money, the first week will be about trying to produce things that people want. But the second week, you’ll want to produce things for the people who produced desirable things. And the third week, you’ll want to produce things for the people who produced desirable things for the people who produced desirable things. Of course this is oversimplified, because it’s not a winner-take-all system where people who produce desirable things go home with everything and everyone else goes home with nothing. But the fact remains that the market will be heavily biased towards catering to those who have the wealth.
[^automation]:It is worth mentioning that in our current system, it is not so clear that this change would be desirable, since the capitalist class would harness almost all the benefits of automation. It is a testament to the argument, however, that *even so*, there has been an underinvestment in labor-saving technologies. Of course, many pro-worker people are happy about this, but let me be clear: it is not labor-saving technology that is the problem, it is the system in which only a small subset of us can reap its benefits.


