[maybe write something about how here I am considering only happiness for a single person. how good a given situation is for a particular person. and if i can show that it is untenable for one person, certainly we should accept that it is untenable for groups. but perhaps there is another way to think about a consequentialist ethics that could work]

[should also include a paragraph about the future, and how to weight the future. and about how decisions will always feel like the right decision]

Part of the illusion that such a quantity does exist is our dual use of the word "happiness". The first use refers to a kind of psychological state (let's call it p-happiness for "psychological" or "phenomenal"), perhaps an emotion like pleasure, a negative definition like the absence of pain or suffering, or something longer-lived, like overall life satisfaction. The second use is sometimes also called "well-being" or "flourishing", or, if you want to sound like a bureaucrat, "utility", and it refers to some state of affairs that is identical with the "good" (let's call it g-happiness for "good"), and that should be optimized as an ethical objective. That is, a hypothetical world with more of this thing is always better, and a world with less of it is always worse — it is the *only thing that matters in determining how good a world is*.

The existence of the p-happiness usage creates the illusion that the thing denoted by g-happiness actually exists. After all, while there might be some disagreement on what p-happiness is, people generally are pretty confident that they know what you mean if you say you're happy. While we might have slightly different ideas what happiness is, there is enough common ground (some level of pleasure and overall life satisfaction, of feeling harmonious, or at peace, etc.) for us to be able to use the word in conversation casually without having to define it every time. It's easy, then, to then slip into thinking that that idea, whatever we sort of agree p-happiness means, *is* g-happiness, that is, it *is* constitutive of "the good". But upon inspection this becomes ludicrous.

## Incomparability of multidimensional quantities
We may agree roughly on what p-happiness consists in, but clearly it is a multidimensional concept. Most would agree that p-happiness has components of pleasure, life satisfaction, peace or harmoniousness, joyousness, lack of pain or suffering, etc. Anything multidimensional, however, creates the problem of incomparability. Let's say happiness were two-dimensional, consisting of pleasure and peace. What is better, $(1, 2)$ or $(2, 1)$? Well, it depends on the relative value you place on pleasure and peace. And if g-happiness truly is the standard by which we judge the goodness or value of something, we'd need our concept of g-happiness be able to answer that question. Thus, we'd have to accept that it goes beyond a simple multidimensional concept like p-happiness, and provides a way to aggregate the components.

## Aggregation across time
Dimensions are not the only thing in need of aggregation to move from a concept of p-happiness to g-happiness, at least one that is useful in ethics. We must also aggregate across time and across people. Thinking across time, directionality matters. Many would say that starting sad and becoming happy is better than the other way around. Given this, an equal weighting across time seems implausible. But perhaps this directionality could be captured in one's moment to moment happiness levels — perhaps when one increases in happiness, the end state is likely to be more extreme, since we appreciate it that much more after the suffering we've been through. And, the other way around, starting sad may not be as bad as ending sad, because at least if we start sad, we are used to it. Still, there are other problems with simply "integrating" happiness across time. One of these is that "remembered happiness", a person's assessment about how happy they were for a given stretch of time in the past (usually "in the last few months") can be quite different from "experienced happiness", the average of a person's assessment on how happy they are *right now*. This could be that asking someone about a stretch of time in the past prompts them to think about different dimensions of happiness — perhaps components like overall life satisfaction, rather than pleasure, for instance. 
- also, we might weight experiences more heavily. it's better to be happy at our wedding than on some random day
- also there is a dynamic where our chunk sizes are different so instead of comparing today with yesterday we're comparing this year with last year, which can have a significant effect of reducing variation of the average experienced happiness
## 


1. even simple concepts that aren't particularly multidimensional do not necessarily permit degrees
2. there are things that most would agree are missing
3. aggregation is not trivial
There are a number of ways out. One is to show that, in effect, there exists *some such thing*, without undertaking the project of actually constructing what it is. The way to argue this would be as follows. Imagine someone was asked to examine states of the world and to compare them. Simply in doing many of these comparisons, it is conceivable that some kind of ordering would result. And that ordering would *imply* a natural scalar quantity that is constitutive of the good: simply assign worlds higher up in the ordering higher values, and worlds lower in the ordering lower values. Thus, even without saying what exactly g-happiness consists in, we can get some "effective g-happiness" measure by doing simple comparisons.

There is a problem with this too, though. Simply making comparisons does not necessarily result in an ordering. Imagine a graph: a set of "nodes" that are connected by arrows, or edges. An arrow $a \rightarrow b$ should be read as "$a$ is worse than $b$" (you can remember this because ideally if you're moving through nodes on the graph, you want to step along a path where things get better). This is the kind of graph you construct when you make comparisons — comparing two worlds, you decide what direction the edge should go, or if there should be no edge at all (if the worlds are somehow incomparable, or if they are equally good). We can then infer some relations from some initial comparison graph by assuming that whoever made filled in the graph has *transitive preferences*, which is to say that if $a  \xrightarrow{\text{worse than}} b$, and $b \xrightarrow{\text{worse than}} c$, then $a$ is worse than $c$. This allows us to say that if any point $z$ is reachable by some path from $a$ (even if it isn't directly connected), then $z$ is better than $a$. 

If this were not so then we could have a situation where $\text{low}$ is worse than $\text{med}$, and $\text{med}$ is worse than $\text{high}$, but somehow $\text{high}$ is worse than $\text{low}$. This would make optimization hopeless, as "increasing" steps could somehow lead to a situation where you are worse off in the end. Further, it would be impossible to infer relations between any two worlds that had not been directly compared, so every world would have to be compared with every other world. That said, there has been research showing that people's demonstrated preferences *are* non-transitive, and if we accept this, then we have no 

But supposing that evidence of non-transitive preferences comes from irrational behavior, and if people really did have time or ability to critically assess alternative states, they would settle on a transitive relation. Even then, comparisons would not lead to an ordering that could generate an "effective g-happiness" metric. Just imagine the different forms that the graph could take. If we assume transitivity and irreflexivity (that is that a state can't be worse than itself), then certainly there would be no cycles, as this would mean that if we start at $a$ and take improving steps around a loop, getting back to where we started. But certainly you could have a tree structure, where two points $a$ and $b$ are incomparable, because neither is reachable from the other (this is called a partial order in math). In fact, the graph would have to have a very particular structure for any two worlds to be comparable. It would have to be possible to arrange the nodes on a line, so that if $b$ is to the right of $a$, $b$ is reachable from $a$. Only such a structure would permit us to derive any kind of effective g-happiness by doing comparisons between worlds. But this is a tall order indeed! It requires us to assume not only *transitivity* and *irreflexivity* (which are perhaps easier to stomach), but also connectedness (that any two worlds are comparable). But do we really think this is true? 