People have the mistaken idea that laissez-faire capitalism is the system that exists when there are no rules. But there is one extremely important rule that capitalism runs on, and that is the rule of ownership. What are the rules of ownership?

- *usus* - you have the right to use the stuff you own
- *fructus* - you are entitled to the income generated by stuff you own
- *abusus* - you can dispose of the property, by selling it, consuming it, or destroying it

Somewhere along the line we were tricked (possibly by Locke and his "life, liberty, property" slogan) into thinking that ownership is a natural right. Actually, it is a man-made rule like any other, and it could be different.

Here is one way that it can be different: ownership can have a time limit. Here's how it would work. Say you buy something — a house, for instance. Instead of buying ownership of the house in perpetuity, you are buying ownership of the house for 40 years, after which the house becomes common property, and can be resold (or remain in the common pool). The proceeds from the sale at this point also go into the common pool. It is possible to make the system continuous, such that a constant share goes back to the common pool

This was in the fact the case in an age when the vast majority of assets were depreciable — your ownership lasted as long as the asset retained its value. This was a natural safeguard against wealth accumulation. 

## why did I go with this and not other ideas
There are many other ideas that could work. 
- What if, when you compensated people, they received a different kind of thing than you paid them with? This is what happens in democracy. You vote for politicians, but they don't get more votes. They get a position. Liquid democracy, btw, does have the fungibility property. Perhaps that is a problem.
- What if compensation was just not transferable? What if it was completely tied to your person? This is kind of how prestige works. If your dad invents something, he gets prestige. But you don't inherit that prestige 
- just completely a voting-based system. how would this work?
- basically in our system capital is two things. because it is completely exchangeable, it is both material wealth, assets, but *also*, the ability to get people to do what you want. what about a system where we divorce these things? can they be divorced?
## How wealth accumulates
## Why wealth accumulation is bad


Economic concerns 
- is it distortionary? what we want is for things to be produced if their benefit exceeds their cost. will this happen with decaying ownership? also a thing i should understand is how exactly taxes are distortionary
- is it possible to implement? 
	- could, for instance, a group of rich people who do want their property to decay basically set up a protection racket where they just keep what they have?
	- what about with digital assets or other abstract assets? it seems possible to basically own and control digital assets without it being registered in a registry. how would it work with crypto
	- why would people want to register ownership of things?
- is it possible to set up a system in part of the world operates under this system and that part of the world is stable?
- does it actually accomplish the goal of preventing inequality from emerging? 
- we are still allowing owners to be entitled to fructus. does this become a problem?
- seems like there is something arbitrary built into the decay rate. is there some way to set it in a sensical decentralized way? or should it be set by vote?
- part of the nice thing about property is that it incentivizes people to make improvements on the property. it also internalizes some externalities, because if you own land in a community, for instance, you like it when nice parks and nice roads are built since it increases property values (are these two things the same thing?) the question is, will this lead to a suboptimal level of improvement
	- is this the same as discouraging investment, since you wouldn't be able to retain ownership on that investment forever?  
- Miles suggests a system where a lot of land is bought up and managed by a developer, and this means that all kinds of nice things can be built because the developer fully benefits from the increase in home values that happens when you build a park nearby. this system might hamper that sort of thing.
- why would ownership exist the way it does now if it wasn't optimal?
- might be hard to implement because while it creates a public good of the world being less unequal, it might any individual feel insecure
- homeownership is often seen as key to social mobility because it allows people to build wealth. isn't it worrisome if you don't allow this
- administrative/transaction costs could be high in operating the whole market that emerges.
- market instability - it is possible that with houses changing hands so often that you never get to an efficient allocation. but I feel like it's good if you make it more liquid ** [Property Rights - Econlib](https://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/PropertyRights.html)
- difficulty in transitioning from what we have now - maybe instead build small communities that operate under this model and build wealth in a a completely different way
- the common pool that the property goes to might be ill-maintained due to the tragedy of the commons
- it might be the case that you'd want different things to have different ownership terms, which would make things very complicated
- if this system were actually better, ownership contracts would already work like this. you would just have large leasers that lease properties for 40 years. why don't they do this?
- the system seems to not be memoryless. that is, if you want to do depreciation, you can't have it go down by a constant 10% every year, instead, you'd want it to go down by a constant number every year (like straight-line vs exponential depreciation). it seems like this would be vulnerable to bundling assets in different ways, etc. we wouldn't want that. should make a system where this isn't the case
- inequality is actually good for investment 
- could it make poor people poorer by removing their safeguards against being impoverished. 
- could be used by people with lots of liquid assets against people with not a lot of liquid assets by basically requiring homeowners to sell their homes to large companies and then pay rent on it
- isn't it just a wealth tax, basically?
- how does it affect discounting of future rewards? does it exacerbate discounting since you don't care after a certain point? Another way to put it: why not just destroy the property before it gets returned to the common pool? if you're only going to own a thing for another year, might as well drop a bomb on it. but maybe you can always buy it back at a discount, so it is always worth something to you (since you could buy and sell it for a profit)
- how would it affect large investments
- couldn't other countries outcompete? basically how do you make it into a self perpetuating system

** don't really undertand this

Moral concerns
- if you buy something, or even more poignantly, make something, shouldn't you be able to keep it forever?
- we have an ideal that we want to create a sphere of sovereignty, where we are king. if we can no longer own things absolutely, that aspiration becomes unattainable. but perhaps their is another ideal of freedom that becomes attainable
- if you don't allow people to own something absolutely, they'll always feel a little insecure
- this could lead to grandmas getting booted out of their homes because they've lost ownership of them. 
- it could lead to instability since people can't buy a foothold in a community, their property expires and then they are foundationless. could lose continuity and cohesion of communities
- possibility for tyranny - this probably sounds autocratic to some people, with things getting yanked out of people's hands, etc.
- simply goes against cultural norms and traditions where property is deeply ingrained
- you are basically banning certain types of contracts — the kind that transfers rights to things in perpetuity

extensions
- if you have a registry of all owned items, then you might also be able to make certain things non-fungible. though that is possibly not true because you can sort of fudge certain things. But maybe you can make certain things non-transferable. You can't exactly say you can't transfer this *for* that, but you can say that certain things are non-transferable
- you could say that certain things are un-ownable. like land.